Vegetarian Lasagna

   


	
	

	
		

		
	Published21 Feb '19



	Updated18 Jun '25

		
	



Vegetable Lasagna is what you make when you want to load up on veggies with something that’s filling, comforting and so moreish, you don’t even think twice about it being Meat Free!



This incredible Vegetarian Lasagna is made with a creamy ricotta and spinach filling as well as layers of roasted vegetables and a homemade tomato lasagna sauce. It’s one of my favourite fridge clean out recipes because it can be made with just about any roastable veggies!











Why you’ll love this Vegetable Lasagna



It is hard to top an epic, meat lasagna made with layers of slow cooker ragu, béchamel sauce and oodles of cheese. But if there’s anything that can give it a run for its money, it’s this Vegetarian Lasagna. Here’s why you’ll love this so much:




Roasted Vegetables –  Roasting trumps stove sautéing when it comes to bringing out flavour in vegetables;



Jar Roasted Red Peppers – with a touch of smokiness and sweetness, this is an optional extra that I love to add because it adds that extra special touch;



Customisable – use whatever roast-able veggies you please;



Spinach and Ricotta layer – It just takes this over the top! But it’s optional – you could easily just double up with another layer of roasted vegetables;



Simple homemade lasagna sauce – skip the jar, this homemade tomato sauce is simple and so good!



Cheese – goes without saying that melty cheese is all part of a great lasagna experience!












How to make Veggie Lasagna



There are a few components to putting together a Veggie Lasagna so we love that it makes a BIG batch and that it reheats 100% perfectly!




Roast vegetables;



Mix up ricotta and spinach;



Make the simple tomato lasagna sauce;



Layer the lasagna as follows:

Smear tomato on base (to stop lasagna sheets from sliding)



Top with lasagna sheets



Roasted vegetables



Some tomato pasta sauce plus cheese



Another layer of lasagna sheets



Spinach and ricotta filling for lasagna



Top with lasagna sheets and pasta sauce



Sprinkle with cheese. Ready to bake!














Vegetarian Lasagna ingredients – vegetables



Roasted Vegetables



I used pumpkin, zucchini and onion as my roasted veggies, but feel free to use whatever you have / want. Anything roastable is fine, just chop it so it cooks in the same time.



I cut mine pretty chunky because otherwise they cook too quickly in the oven – I like to roast veggies for at least 20 minutes minimum to get the maximum benefit of caramelisation.



Roasted Red Peppers



My “special ingredient” – Roasted Red Peppers! Basically, it’s capsicum / bell peppers that have been fire roasted so they have that gorgeous smokey flavour.



It’s sweet, soft and slippery and it adds an awesome extra dimension to this lasagna. Yep, I take the easy route and buy it in a jar but if you’re a keen bean, make your own!











Vegetable lasagna is sensational served fresh out of the oven, but it’s also one of those dishes that are terrific the next day. The flavour of those roasted veggies and that spinach ricotta layer develop overnight, and just a quick reheat in the microwave is all that’s required to bring it back to the original molten state.



So, fellow Carnivores. Have I convinced you to give this a go??? 😜 – Nagi x







My favourite Meat-Free Comfort Foods




Chickpea Potato Curry – big curry flavours made with pantry staple spices!



Cream of Vegetable Soup with Noodles



One Pot Vegetable Pasta



French Onion Soup



Creamy Baked Pumpkin Risotto



Pasta alla Norma



Browse the Vegetarian recipes collection




















Vegetable Lasagna
Watch how to make it



Sometimes it helps to have a visual, so watch me make this Vegetarian Lasagna recipe!







Hungry for more? Subscribe to my newsletter and follow along on Facebook, Pinterest and Instagram for all of the latest updates.



	

		
		Vegetable Lasagna

		

			 Author: Nagi
			 Prep: 25 minutes 
			 Cook: 50 minutes 
			
			 Total: 1 hour  15 minutes 
			
			 Mains
			 Western

		

		

	

	

		 Servings8 – 12 people
		Tap or hover to scale

	

	

	

		Recipe VIDEO above. Layered with roasted vegetables, spinach and ricotta, a homemade sauce and as much cheese as you see fit, this big batch vegetarian lasagna reheats brilliantly. Epic meat-free food for carnivores! 
		IngredientsRoasted Vegetables (Note 1):▢ 500 g / 1 lb pumpkin , 2cm / 4/5″ cubes▢ 2 large zucchinis , cut into 2cm / 4/5″ chunks▢ 2 onions (any type) , cut into wedges▢ 2 tbsp olive oil▢ 1 garlic clove , minced▢ Salt and pepperSpinach Ricotta:▢ 250 g / 8 oz  frozen chopped spinach , thawed▢ 500 g / 1 lb  ricotta (Note 2)▢ 1/2 cup / 50 g grated parmesan (or 3/4 cup shredded cheese)▢ 1 egg▢ 1 garlic clove , minced▢ 1/8 tsp grated nutmeg, optional (fresh or powder)▢ 1/2 tsp each Salt and pepperSauce:▢ 1 tbsp olive oil▢ 1 garlic clove▢ 1 small onion , finely chopped (any, I use brown)▢ 700 g / 24 oz  tomato passata (Note 3)▢ 400 g / 14 oz  crushed tomato▢ 1/2 cup / 125 ml water▢ 3/4 tsp each dried thyme and oregano (or basil, parsley)▢ 1/2 tsp dried chilli flakes (can omit / adjust to taste)▢ Salt and pepperLasagna:▢ 330g / 11 oz jar roasted red pepper strips, drained (Note 4)▢ 375 g / 13 oz  fresh lasagne sheets (Note 5)▢ 300 g / 3 cups shredded mozzarella (or MORE!)
Cook ModePrevent screen from sleeping
		InstructionsRoasted Vegetables:Preheat oven to 200C/390F.Place vegetables on the tray, drizzle with oil, sprinkle with garlic, salt and pepper. Toss.Roast for 25 minutes, turning at 15 minutes, until tender and browned.Remove from oven, loosen from tray with spatula while warm (can stick when cools).Sauce:Heat oil in a skillet over medium high heat. Add garlic and onion, cook for 3 minutes until golden.Add passata, crushed tomato, water, dried herbs, chilli, salt and pepper. Stir. Simmer on medium low heat for 20 minutes. Adjust salt at the end. *Add a teeny touch of sugar if it’s a bit sour, depends on quality of tomatoes used.*Remove from stove and let cool for 5 minutes before using.Ricotta Mixture:Place ingredients in a bowl and mix until combined.Lasagna:Preheat oven to 160C/320F.Spread a ladle of tomato sauce on the base of a large baking dish (Note 5).Cover with lasagna sheets, tearing as required to fit.Top with roasted vegetables, scatter over red peppers. Spoon over 2 1/2 cups of Sauce, then sprinkle with half the cheese.Cover with lasagna sheets. Spread over Ricotta mixture.Cover with lasagna sheets. Pour over remaining sauce and sprinkle with remaining cheese.Bake for 25 – 30 minutes or until the cheese is golden. If using dried lasagna sheets, stick a knife in the middle to ensure it’s cooked – if it needs longer, cover and stick it back in the oven.Rest for 5 minutes before cutting and serving. Store leftovers per notes – brilliant reheated!
		
		 Recipe Notes:1. Veggies – feel free to use any vegetables you want, just cut them so they roast in around 20 to 25 minutes. Cauliflower, broccoli, carrots, squash are some I’ve used in the past.
Pumpkin: 600g/1.2lb unpeeled weight.
2. Ricotta – It’s best to get ricotta over the counter at the deli, even at supermarkets, rather than buying in tubs unless it’s a brand you know is good like Paesanella. Harris Farms brand ricotta is also good. I find ricotta in tubs at supermarkets is typically grainy and kind of powdery – even the “big” brands (like Perfect Italiano).
3. Tomato passata is pureed tomato, just plain tomato with no flavourings. It is so good for making sauces like this because it’s smooth even without cooking it down for ages ie no tomato lumps. It comes in tall bottles and is better value than canned tomato (by weight). Found in the pasta aisle of supermarkets in Australia – it’s becoming increasingly popular. I like to use a combination of passata and crushed tomato for for texture and flavour.
If you can’t find passata, use the same weight of crushed tomato.
America – if you can’t find tomato passata, use Tomato Puree or what you call Tomato Sauce.
4. Roasted Red Peppers – optional, adds sweetness and extra flavour dimension. I use Always Fresh. You could just add chopped capsicum / bell peppers to the roasted vegetables.
5. LASAGNA SHEETS: I like using fresh lasagne sheets sold in the fridge section. If you can only get dried, use No Boil sheets for convenience, or if required pre cooking, cook the lasagna sheets per the packet directions.
If using dried instant / No Boil lasagne sheets, add an extra 1/2 cup of water into your sauce (because the lasagne sheets absorb liquid while cooking). Note, sometimes dried instant lasagna sheets usually end up with a buckled surface, but doesn’t affect flavour.
I prefer fresh lasagna because it doesn’t absorb liquid while cooking so the lasagna stays really nice and saucy. 
SUB: Believe it or not, tortillas make an excellent substitute for lasagna sheets! Ideal gluten free option – use corn tortillas.
6. My baking pan is 33 x 22 x 7 cm / 13 x 9 x 2.5″.
7. STORAGE: This keeps so well in both the fridge and freezer. Cool before covering, then refrigerate or freeze. Defrost before warming. I just reheat in the microwave, but you can also reheat in the oven.
Make ahead: Best way is to assemble then refrigerate or freeze, then bake (defrosted) when required per recipe.
8. Nutrition per serving, assuming 10 servings. 

	

	Nutrition Information:Calories: 524cal (26%)Carbohydrates: 48g (16%)Protein: 27g (54%)Fat: 25g (38%)Saturated Fat: 12g (75%)Cholesterol: 121mg (40%)Sodium: 1175mg (51%)Potassium: 996mg (28%)Fiber: 4g (17%)Sugar: 11g (12%)Vitamin A: 6390IU (128%)Vitamin C: 30.4mg (37%)Calcium: 475mg (48%)Iron: 4.7mg (26%)

	

		Keywords: Vegetable Lasagna, Vegetarian Lasagna

	

	

		   Did you make this recipe?I love hearing how you went with my recipes! Tag me on Instagram at @recipe_tin.

	




This Vegetarian Lasagna recipe was originally published February 2018. Updated for housekeeping matters. No change to recipe – I wouldn’t dare!



Life of Dozer



Whenever I go away, I never pack until the night before. Because the sight of a suitcase reduces Dozer to this:












	

Hi, I'm Nagi!I believe you can make great food with everyday ingredients even if you’re short on time and cost conscious. You just need to cook clever and get creative!
 Read More


									
						
													Free Recipe eBooks
											
				
									
							Join my free email list to receive THREE free cookbooks!						
							
Reader Interactions